let's do a quick review of what we know
about type checking in the context of
inheritance hierarchies and we'll also
talk about a new handy tool known as
casting so what I'd like you to do to
set the stage here is consider this code
and think about for each line of code
does that line of code cause a
compilation error and - does it cause
what method actually gets executed so if
we think about how dynamic method
selection works which one actually gets
run which method in the hierarchy so
I've already done the first two lines
for you I have that the vengeful s list
so I DSL is a vengeful s list variable
at a static type vengeful s list and
that points at a vengeful s list object
s L by contrast is an S list static type
- variable and it still points at
eventual s list because hey that's what
it does so think about these remaining
lines of code and I will let you pause
the video and ponder that so let's
consider first these two lines of code
I'm gonna put them in isolation in this
case do these work yes s lists have
certainly an add last and a remove last
method and which one gets called well
first when we consider the add last call
we consider the dynamic type what's the
dynamic type of SL well its vengeful s
list so we'll try and call the add last
method of vengeful s list however
vengeful s list did not actually
implement that it didn't override it so
it'll just go one step higher in the
hierarchy and it will use the S list
class at last method dynamic method
selection then comes around to remove
last and says hey you know what I'm
always gonna decide if the method is
overridden I'm gonna pick based on the
runtime type of the variable and in this
case the vengeful s list class does have
a remove last method we wrote it in one
of the first videos of the sequence and
so it runs the eventual s list okay so
other words we already knew little
review that's how dynamic method
selection behaves now how about this
next line of code SL dot print lost
items now here you might think well I
mean it is a vengeful S list and it has
a print lost items so maybe dynamic
method selection should be doing
something but there's an issue and
that's it the compiler is very
conservative with type checking so it
actually checks and it says you know s
lists don't actually
prynt lost items variable and the rule
of thumb the very simple rule is that
the compiler decides whether or not
something is valid based only on the
compile time type with a variable
remember that's also called the static
type so in this case because the S list
the SL variable has static type s list
we cannot call print lost items even
though this underlying object here it
has dynamic type ventral s lists and
does have a print lost items method it
cannot run and actually the same thing
happens on this next line whenever I try
and assign that the address of this
vengeful s list to a new variable not
pictured here because it crashes but if
I actually created this variable bsl-2 I
could not actually copy the contents
from this memory box s list to another
vengeful s list box because the compiler
will say cannot take an S list and copy
its addressed eventual s list even
though you and I both know that the
runtime type is ventral s list so why is
that like what's the idea here well
basically the compiler is only going to
allow method calls and assignments based
on compile time types and it's just very
nervous it doesn't know what's gonna
happen at runtime and if it did actually
try and you know use all the intuition
we use to say this should be fine it
would have to basically mentally execute
the code in advance and that would mean
the compiler would have to be
considerably more sophisticated and in
fact it could run into trouble where a
bug in the code might mean the code
never compiles okay so kind of a subtle
issue but think about it this way just
the compiler is super super super
conservative and it will only allow
things based strictly on the compile
time types that you tell it ok now this
last little bit here whenever we said we
could not do this assignment we can
actually generalize that event and say
that expressions have compiled time
types and one of the jobs of the
compiler is to make sure that all the
expressions compile time types line up
and so we're not gonna go through the
whole type system in Java because it's
too complicated but essentially I'll
give a couple examples first if we have
an instantiation using the new keyword
this has some specified compile time
type so if I say new vengeful s list you
can think of this whole expression as
having a compile-time type and it's
tight this vengeful s list and so when
java is trying to decide is this
assignment allowed it says here if this
is a vengeful s list and this is an s
list that says is the vengeful s list
and s list and it has this diagram it
can look and say yes indeed eventual s
list is a subclass of s list so I'm
going to allow this assignment so it
checks the right-hand side which I will
have on the slides is just RH s it
checks the right-hand side and make sure
that this type is compatible with the
left hand side of the expression now by
contrast if we create an S list right
this has static type s list and this has
static type vengeful s list and it says
is an S list eventual s list
well sometimes but not always and so the
compiler plays it very safe and it says
this is not allowed and will crash now
we can have other types of expressions
so when you add numbers that's an
expression when you do new that's an
expression and maybe one of the most
interesting things is a method call so
this anytime we call an X say max dog
and it's the expression here are
actually I'll say here maybe this
example is a good place to start I have
two poodles Frank and Frank jr. and I
say dog larger dog equals max dog Frank
Frank jr. so the question is what is the
compile time type aka the static type of
the max dog call well it's whatever you
declared it to be so I said it's public
dog
therefore the compile time type of any
expression that uses max dog or say any
call to max dog will be dog okay and so
in this case we say dog larger dog
equals max dog Frank and Frank jr. it
says okay this is a dog is a dog a dog
yes okay so that lines fine but then
when it gets to this bottom line when it
does max dog Frank and Frank jr. even
though the runtime type of these two
objects is poodle we cannot assign the
result to a poodle variable why well
because the compiler says the static
type of the max dog call is dog right
the compile time type is whatever you
specified and therefore it
assign that to a poodle variable because
as it says is a dog a poodle well
sometimes but not always so I won't
allow it
okay now there is some time so sometimes
you actually want this to work and
casting is something we're gonna do
rarely and in fact we already did in the
array Dec class and project 1a but this
general tool of casting works like so so
I have an expression whatever it may be
it could be a method call it could be an
instantiation it could be an arithmetic
operation it could be some giant you
know blob of stuff there's a special
syntax where you can say to the compiler
please consider this expression to have
this certain compile time type so to do
that this expression as compile time
type dog why because it's public dog max
dog and we can say please treat this
like a poodle okay to do that we put in
parentheses the name of the class that
we want it to treat it like and in that
case the compiler will now in terms of
its type checking the first thing that
compiler does is it make sure
everything's good for that purpose it
will use this as the type so for example
this code right here that didn't work so
well if we just add poodle in
parentheses here the compiler will say
okay the programmer is specified that
the output of the max dog here is no
longer static type dog it is in fact
type poodle is the poodle of pootle yes
therefore we're good
now that approach while useful can
sometimes run you into trouble because
basically what you're doing is tricking
the compiler you're telling the compiler
please don't do your job don't don't be
you know such a wimp trust me so it's a
powerful but dangerous tool you should
use it sparingly and it basically tells
java treat this the way i want you to
treat it so let's suppose this is where
you cannot no trouble we have a poodle
variable and a Malamute variable now
both of these are dogs so we can pass
them to the max dog method and this will
turn a type objective type dog and we
can cast it to poodle well the compiler
ordinarily if we didn't have poodle here
would say no no no no this is a dog and
I don't know what kind of dog this
expressions gonna get back but we can
say no trust me it's gonna be a pool
everything's gonna be cool but in this
case
actually the result is Frank senior and
so when we try and cast that Malamute
that comes back as a poodle then at
runtime we run into trouble so in
particular if you run it it will say
class cast exception and the code
crashes at runtime so we said earlier
actually in the very first lecture that
one of the great things about Java is it
does this type checking
meaning that nobody on the other end
should run into type errors however if
you decide to use casting that is no
longer true so in that sense it is
dangerous but sometimes you'll find it
quite handy